---
layout: post
title: Long Entries
---

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


@book{moore2016jerusalem,  
  title={Jerusalem: A Novel},  
  author={Moore, A.},  
  number={bk. 1},  
  isbn={9781631492433},  
  lccn={2016014957},  
  url={https://books.google.com/books?id=0h16zgEACAAJ},  
  year={2016},  
  publisher={Liveright Publishing Corporation},  
  comment={3 volumes. 1266 pages. Northhampton. Everything else under Alan Moore's sun.},  
  category={Long Entries},  
}
% This book is also available on the Anarchist Library: \url{https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alan-moore-jerusalem}  
% Page 22: Sometimes, if the knew Mick's background, they'd sit looking thoughtful before asking home how anyone like Alma Warren could possible have emerged from a notorious urban soul-trap like the Boroughs. He considered this a stupid question, as if there were any other place she could have come from, Hell or Narnia or somewhere. How long was it since there's been even a trace of the authentic working class, if its conspicuous products were today unrecognisable as dodos? What happened to that culture? Other than those parts of it which had been tempted up into the low boughs of the middle classes or drained off into the cardboard jungle, how hand it all vanished so that these days if they saw it, now one had a clue what they were looking at? Why hadn't somebody complained?"  
% Page 115, on a page already dog-eared and folded down, pointing to a paragraph where Fred the ghost climbs "The Jacob Flight, a seemingly deliberately inconvenient construction somewhere in between a d boxed-in staircase and a roofer's ladder, as as awkward and exhausting to ascend as ever. All the treads were no more than three inches deep, while all the risers were a good food-and-a-half. This meant you had to climb the stairs just as you would a ladder, sort of upright on all fours, using your hands and feet. But on the other hand you were enclosed by rough white plaster walls to either side, the stairway being no more than four feet across, with just above your head a steeply sloping ceiling, also in white plaster. The ridiculous impracticality of such an angle to the stairway made it seem like something from a dream, which Fred supposed it was. Someone's dream, somewhere, sometime.  
% Page 135: Peter drinks from the well to find it is blood. 136: it is in fact dye  
% Page 229: When he’d started it, he’d been a schoolboy from a dark house down in Freeschool Street, deploring all the grimy factory yards the way that he thought John Clare would have done; lamenting the bucolic idyll that, in his imagination, the contemporary mean streets of the Boroughs had displaced. Only when those slate rooftops and tree-punctured chimney breasts had been themselves removed had come belated recognition that the narrow lanes were the endangered habitat he should have been commemorating. Bottle-caps, not bluebells. He’d thrown out his central metaphor, the droning, drowning hedgerows of a continent that he’d reported lost but in all truth had never really owned, and written “Clearance Area” instead. After the neighbourhood as Benedict had known it was no more, at last he’d found a voice that had been genuine and of the Boroughs. Looking back, he thought that later poem had been more about the bulldozed flats of his own disillusion than the demolition site his district had become, although perhaps the two were ultimately the same thing.  
% Page 237: Teenaged and pretentious, he’d bemoaned the loss of byres and furrows that he’d never known, that were John Clare’s to mourn. Benedict had composed laments to vanished rural England while ignoring the fecund brick wilderness he lived in, but as things turned out there was still grass, there were still flowers and meadows if you looked for them. The Boroughs, on the other hand, a unique undergrowth of people’s lives, you could search for it all you wanted, but that one particular endangered habitat was gone for good. That half-a-square-mile continent had sunk under a deluge of bad social policy. First there had been a mounting Santorini rumble of awareness that the Boroughs’ land would be more valuable without its people, then came bulldozers in a McAlpine tidal wave. A yellow foam of hard hats surged across the neighbourhood to break against the shores of Jimmy’s End and Semilong, the human debris washed up in a scum-line of old people’s flats at King’s Heath and at Abington. When the construction tide receded there’d been only high-rise barnacles, the hulks of sunken businesses and the occasional beached former resident, flopping and gasping there in some resurfaced underpass. Benedict, an antediluvian castaway, became the disappeared world’s Ancient Mariner, its Ishmael and its Plato, cataloguing deeds and creatures so fantastic as to be implausible, increasingly even to Ben himself. The bricked up entrance to the medieval tunnel system in his cellar, could that truly have been there? The horse that brought his dad home every night when Jem was passed out at the reins, could that have possibly existed? Had there been real deathmongers and cows on people’s upstairs landings and a fever cart?  
% Page 245: Nobody cared. Nothing meant anything that couldn’t be turned instantly into its opposite by any competent spin-doctor or spoon-bender. History and language had become so flexible, wrenched back and forth to suit each new agenda, that it seemed as if they might just simply snap in half and leave us floundering in a sea of mad Creationist revisions and greengrocers’ punctuation.  
% Page 404: There he’d been, just leaning on somebody’s old dream of a balcony and puffing on his favourite pipe. This was the one he’d whittled from the spicy, madness-seasoned spirit of an eighteenth-century French diabolist. He fancied that it made his best tobacco taste of Paris, sexual intercourse and murder, somewhere between meat and liquorice.  
% Page 418: pigeons can move back and forth between the regular three-dimensional world and the higher planes. Possible because of all the birds they are the only kind that feed their young milk.  
% Page 468: Phyllis Painter lived in a place where she could take the board off in the basement and see the spring for which Spring Street was named.  
% Page 692: Wealthy homeowners are doomed to spend eternity worrying about whether the value of the homes they used to live in was rising or falling. NIMBY protesters are doomed to spend eternity fretting about neighborhood change and unable to do anything about it.  
% Page 693: those who were concerned with status in their mortal lives fail to make it to the upper levels of the afterlife.  There's no rule about who can get into the afterlife, people do it to themselves. People fail to move to the afterlife because they feel either like they are too good for most people, or not good enough. Those who can't be comfortable with the masses are those who can't bring themselves to go.  
  
  
@book{holldobler1990ants,  
  title={The ants},  
  author={H{\"o}lldobler, Bert and Wilson, Edward O and others},  
  year={1990},  
  publisher={Harvard University Press},  
  comment={The classic in-depth look at the lives of ants},  
  category={Long entires, Science, ants},  
}  
% Cartoon: The Ants is hard to read. How to read The Ants? In bed with your knees up and the book resting on your raised lap.  
% Page 1: In 1979 an ant colony was found in Japan with more than 300 million workers and 1 million queens in 47,000 interconnected nests over nearly 3 square kilometers.  
% Page 2: The Ants of the Amazon rain forest are responsible for much of the formic acid in the atmosphere over the rain forest.  
% Plate 1: the sole example of the missing link ant between wasps and ants. Would make a good record cover.  
% If you see the whole colony as the organism, rather than the individual, then the males are nothing more than winged penises. Page 150: the males are active during their mating flight hour, but do nothing else but groom themselves, solicit food from the female workers, and walk sluggishly around the nest.  
% Page 178: a common Japanese ant species has eliminated the queen caste entirely, and the colony reproduced parthenogenically. They are essentially asexual.  
% Page 178: "It can be said that a principal different between human beings and ants is that whereas we send out young men to war, they send their old ladies"  
% Page 180: kin selection --- this theory of how altruistic behavior evolved in ants jibes with Darwinian evolution. There is some sense implied that it must apply at some level to humans too. But whereas in ants it can be codified and literally formulated, in humans it seems like it must be far more complex, if it exists. I'm sure there's further reading on it somewhere.  
% Page 184: prediction of a 3:1 ratio of energy investment in queens as opposed to males during the production of reproductives. "a rare instance of quantitative prediction in evolutionary biology." This is because ants have a reproductive system where only half the genetic material is passed on to males, and all genetic material is passed on to females. This is also why females end up being workers. While this supports kin selection theory in ants, humans pass all their genetic material on to both males and females so kin selection is not nearly so straightforward.  
% Page 185: eusociality: the "highest" form of social interaction. To be classified as eusocial, an animal has to exhibit three characteristics: brood care, overlap of at least two generations, division of group into reproductive and sterile castes. Later, in the mid-2000s, Wilson would claim that human beings are eusocial, and that is what led to our dominance.  
% Page 216: Unicolonial ants (a colony with many queens, each in their own nest) totally dominate their environment and become the largest of ant colonies. Typically they wipe out nearly all the other ant species in the area. (Also see graphic on page 215 of nest sites and the networks between them that looks uncannily like a map of cities in a country and the networks between them.)  
% Page 223: who is in charge queens or workers? There is a lot of control of queens by using chemicals that stimulate the workers to do things for her and the colony. However its not clear-cut domination, the workers express choices about which queen will be the primary queen in many species.  
% Page 224: in certain species the queen feeds exclusively on the blood of her growing larvae, by slitting their skin and drinking the pooling liquid.  
% Page 246: ants are so sensitive to their pheromones that one milligram of the trail pheromone substance (about what is in a colony) would be enough to lead a trail of ants three times around the world.  
% Page 250: the dance of the honeybee explained. It's pretty straightforward actually, the bee dances in a direction that indicates a direction to fly for food, and then for a distance to show how far to fly. This is 'ritualization' where flying movements were evolutionarily adapted to a secondary communication signal.  
% Page 256: some ants have a stridulation/scraping organ that allows them to produce a 'chirp,' characterized as the shortest unitary rhythm element distinguishable by the human ear.  
% Page 257: generally ants can't hear sounds transmitted through the air, rather the stridulations are heard through the ground or nest material. The chirps are often used by ants who are trapped by a cave-in or some other thing, to summon help to dig them out.  
% Page 271: Complexity arises from simplicity: Individual ants laying a trail reinforce the quality/size of a food item by having more and more ants lay trails together, making the trail scent stronger and indicating the quality/size/distance of food. At the same time the maximum number of ants at the food will start to turn away uneeded extras, so the right number of ants needs is self-correcting.   
% Page 272: At the same time ants don't want to be TOO specific with their information, because scattering around a target is useful (think of a moving prey target, older trails become less accurate). See note on naval gunnery. (See note on page 272 though about alterntative possibility for quantity on ant trails.)  
% Page 298: Clock analogy: the power of eusocial organization comes from the division into castes for different groups of work to be done. Particularly important is the separation of a reproductive caste. Compared to a clock, each piece of a clock can be a simple piece, and assembled together create a complex mechanism. It would not work if each piece needed to know something about time (as ant colonies would not work if each ant needed to carry out reproduction).  
% Page 301: They lay out a glossary of castes, vastly simplified from a very complex glossary laid out by a scientist first looking at the subject in the early 1900s. What's interesting (to me) is that the guy who tried it first (Wheeler), because he _didn't_ have enough information (and he did have a penchant for classical languages and neologisms) created a much _more_ complicated glossary of castes --- far more categorical divisions than were actually needed to effectively explain observations. Further more, Wilson argues that the category definitions should actually be _kept_ a little loose and non-specific, to facilitate better comparisons across groups, and easier understanding for more scientists. I believe there's a lesson here about diving in too soon to complexity, and as often happens, someone needed to come along and cut out much of excess complexity that was actually obfuscating insight.  
% Page 307: Adaptive demography: ants will deliberately change their population size based on their colony life cycle stage. Vertebrates don't do this at all. It is yet another powerful result of eusocial behavior. It also, I think, is one of those ways that humans are not at _all_ like ants. Ants are facinating because they are at once both _so_ alien, and also have uncanny characteristics akin to human hebavior that _must_ have some revealing insights into our own behavior. I think Wilson understood this, but at the same time it's dangerous work to try and cut where it is that we can learn about ourselves from ants from where it is that they are insanely alien lifeforms that seem like they arrived from another planet.  
% Page 323: Some ants use "alloethism" --- caste distinctions by large size differences --- to create workers who can handle a wide range of tasks and thus exploit a wide-ranging generalized set of food sources. "Hunter-gatherers."
% Page 325-326: Leaf-cutter ants (genus: Atta) use the same huge size differences to _specialize_ in food: the largeest cut tough leaves, smaller one shred them into small pieces, and even smaller ones mush them up and place them as a substrate to grow fungus on. The tinest tend the crops and harvest fungus heads to feed to other ants in the colony. They are using both assembly line processing and agriculture/farming to feed the colony.  
% Page 342: most ants spend most of their time doing absolutely nothing at all. In one species up to 78 percent of the time is idle. This is widely common among animals in general. They cite work by Herbers (1981) that showed most animals gather fuel until they hit a certain level of energy, and then just idle out.  
% Page 345: pusatile activity --- ant nests have been observed breaking up their idleness with regularly periodic bursts of activity. This is speculated to be regular communicative "check-ins" across the colony, where it is more efficient to communicate all at once and rapidly in or that information doesn't change as it might during a slow spreading system.  
	% I think this could have interesting implications for organizational management. Imagine an office where the workers spend most of their day idle (or at least working on their own) punctuated by designated communication times at specific times, a few times during the day. Say you use chat software, that you leave quiet for the group until a specific time, and then have a rapid reporting of anything affecting the team. The periodicity of the reporting could be changed depending on what the team does, but the idea that there would be mostly time of 'idleness' punctuated by a colony-wide fast report-out is interesting.  
% Page 356: reliability theory --- a system made with redundant parts is more reliable than having a whole redundant system (since any individual part might fail in both instances of a redundant system).  
% Page 358: Rules of thumb --- any individual ant operates on nothing more than a few rules of thumb. Complex behavior arises from these simple rules.  
% Page 358-359: the superorgamism --- Wilson recounts how Wheeler first popularized the whole any colong as a superorganism in his paper "The Ant Colony as an Organism." And this blew up until it entered pop culture, and doses of mysticism were applied ("spirit of the hive"). By the 1960s scientists weren't using the concept anymore. But Wilson here is arguing that all of the sophisticated tools they have to stuf ants now (that is, the 1990s when this book was written) mean that the concept of the superorganism is once again useful. Mainly, that is the ability to measure ant colonies at a far more fine-grained level to deduce it's _quantitative_ relationship to other organisms. Essentially, Wilson is saying that all the complex statistical analysis they have been presenting so far in the book have led to this argument that it is now time to think about the superorganism again. (This little section on the superorganism really feels like an inflection point in the book to me.)  
% Page 363: different species of ants have different tempos. Some are slow and deliberate and careful in their movements. Others are fast, random, and chaotic and take risks. It seems that the fast-tempo ants occur in species in large colonies. Those colonies are labor saturated with many many workers, so it is more efficient (for the colony) for individual workers to work themselves to death or die taking risks because there's always another ant to pick up the job. Slow tempo colonies are smaller and the individual ants live longer.  
% Page 398: The common pavement ants in North America carry out some of the most dramatic battles between colonies of the same species. Huge wars between hundreds or even thousands of ants.  
% Page 400: "Invasive" species tend to settle into a niche: in the 1500s a fire ant (then called F. omnivora) invaded Carribean islands in huge numbers. The people of the islands called on their saints and leaders to protect them. By the 20th century the ant had settled down into a commone "native" fire ant with very modest numbers.  
% Page 512: Most mimicry by other insects that exploit the social behavior of ants is chemical not physical/morphological. Some beetles that run with army ants have evolved a striking resemblence to the ants --- but that is almost entirely to fool predators (birds) that look for insects stirred up by passing ants. There are many parasites that look nothing like the ants, but live in and off of an ant colony purely by chemical mimicy.
% Page 513: There are exceptions to parasites fooling ants with only chemicals though: one cricket lives among blind ants and fools them with just enough physical parts that resememble ants so the ants don't attack them --- until they feel something alien. On this page is a vibrant description of blind humans living in a room with a monster that has human hands. The blind humans aren't aware they live with a monster until they feel something other than hands...
% Page 530: This chapter on ants and plants should be read by any landscape architect or person interested in plants. Plants evolved a number of structures to encourage ants to nest on and around them, including special chambers for ants to use as nests, and food bodies to feed ants. The ants in turn defend the plants from other insect predators, move nutrients to the plants' roots. and prune and weed around the plant to keep other plant leaves from bridging to their home plants and allowing competing ants to attack. This is all on top of the relationship ants have with aphids, (described in previous chapter) where ants care for their aphid broods, keep aphid eggs in their nests over winter, and disperse them to more favorable "pastures" among plants. There's even a nomadic species of ant that move with its aphid flock from pasture to pasture.
% Page 554: Cordyceps fungus that parasitize ant species, consuming their bodies from the inside until they burst out the head and throw up a stalk. (This book has been far more entertaining in the last quarter than in the first three quarters.)
% Page 569: some ants are capable of controlling the amount they dispense with their sting, so they can inject just enough poison to paralyze their prey, and then store their prey in their nest, alive, for weeks until they eat them.
% Page 575: A detailed description of the _sound_ of a column of hundreds of thousands of moving army ants: the prey insects scurrying before them, the ant birds chirping around them, and the shuffling of the mass of ants itself. (This seems like a natural phenomenon that would be worth experiencing in real life.)
% Page 588: The army ants and the driver ants hunt by creating pseudopods of ants that spread out slowly from a trunk, rather than a singular ants randomly foraging. In Africa the driver ants drive everything before them and consume anything they find, including large animals that do not get out of the way. This page contains an awesome descriptive excerpt from the mid-19th Century of driver ants invading a house and the people standing on chairs to escape them.
% 597: The sheer mass of leafcutter ants (mostly _Atta_) and the amount they consumed is detailed on 597. Including the fact that there are few large herbivores in Central and South America because the ants consume most of the vegetation.
% 607, and some stuff in pages before: the ants use their fungus to act as external pre-digesters of plant matter. By growing fungus on the plants, they found a way to consume many plants that are toxic to other insect herbivores.

  
   
@book{eliot2003middlemarch,  
  title={Middlemarch},  
  author={Eliot, G. and McDaniel, M. and Schwartz, L.S.},  
  isbn={9781593080235},  
  lccn={2003100588},  
  series={Barnes \& Noble Classics},  
  url={https://books.google.com/books?id=rTuCTr1pdc4C},  
  year={2003},  
  publisher={Barnes \& Noble Classics},  
  comment={The classic 19th Century epic costume drama about a small town in the English countryside.},  
  category={Long Entries, Novels, 19th century novels, costume drama}  
}  
% General notes   
% * Page 5: Sane people did what their neighbors did, so that if any lunatics were at large, one might know and avoid them.  
% * Page 9: "How very beautiful these gems are! said Dorothea, under a new current of feeling, as sudden as the gleam. "It is strange how deeply colours seem to penetrate one, like scent. I suppose that is the reason why gems are used as spiritual emblems in the Revelation of St. John. They look like fragments of heaven. I think that emerald is more beautiful than any of them."  
	% * I wonder if we lost something from the world before industrial dyes. The world must have been a much less intensely colored place then. More greens, grays, and beiges. And now, with industrial colors, it is full of all manner of color --- false colors, in their way (not so false in others). It has certainly, like the coming of prevalence of aluminum, devalued color. We live now in a world surrounded by a king's richness of color, and nobody really cares.  
	% * That makes sense too, why should anyone care about what is common? But it must also have been, it its way, such a richer world when the sparkle of some small glowing red jewel could hold your attention, entertain you, satisfy you, move you.  
	% * For these people, it seems like the diamond would hold little interest. Just like a dull chip of colorless glass, what's good about that? Is it also possible (putting aside the well-documented commercial machinations of deBeers) that the rise of industrial dyes meant that people started looking to the diamond as a more valuable thing because it DIDN'T have a color?  
	% * Personally, maybe my wardrobe is an attempt to get back to that more colorless world, and maybe through that to appreciate color more? It would be interesting to insist on sticking to natural dyes!  
% * Page 27: Dorothea wants to be an architect/designer. She designs cottages for the poor in her spare time.  
% * Page 37: In short, woman was a problem which, since Mr. Brooke's mind felt blank before it, could be hardly less complicated than the revolutions of an irregular solid.  
% * Page 64: He did not usually find it easy to give his reasons: it seemed to him strange that people should not know them without being told, since he only felt what was reasonable <-- the core of all mansplaining!  
% * Page 65: It is a very good quality in a man to have a trout stream.  
% * Page 79: Genius consisting neigh in self-conceit nor in humility, but in a power to make or do, not anything in general, but something in particular.  
% * 85 pages in and this book has not passed the Bechtel test yet --- except one brief conversation between two ladies about chickens, and half a page about quack medicines. Lots of women talking to each other, but only about who men would marry.  
% * Page 84: her complaint, which puzzled the doctors, and seemed clearly a case wherein the fulness of professional knowledge might need the supplement of quackery.  
% * Page 86: Mr. Lydgate has the medical accomplishment of looking perfectly grave whatever nonsense was talked to him.  
% * Page 385: There are a number of anti-semetic allusions in the book. Here: And now I'm going to be as rich as a Jew. But in other places even more strongly anti-Jew. See also:  
	% * https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/georelioghlstud.70.2.0143?seq=1  
	% * https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/02/14/middlemarch-and-me  
% * Chapter 56: This chapter has a lot about the railway coming to town:   
	% * Page 525: Women both old and young considered traveling by steam as presumptuous and dangerous.  
	% * Page 527: "Why, they're Lunnon chaps I reckon," said Hiram, who had a dim notion of London as a centre of hostility to to country.  
	% * Page 532: Caleb was in a difficulty known to any person attempting in dark times and unassisted by miracle to reason with rustics who are in possession of an undeniable truth which they know through a hard process of feeling, and can let it fall like a giant's club on your neatly-carved argument for a social benefit which they do _not_ feel.  
% * Page 680, top: Lydgate doesn't even consider interviewing the housekeeper about Raffles death. This whole book has this interesting 19th century relationship to the servants: they are always implied to be there in the background, but they are barely seen as human so they only come to the foreground on the rare occasions that their actions directly interact with an upper-class character, much like a pet in a modern novel. This isn't so much a criticism as pointing out this interesting shift in the culture. If someone, even someone without deep resources of vision or analysis of human behavior, just a 'casual' author, were writing this story today, they would, by default, make the servants real people, and would make the main characters interact with them as real people. It is amazing to me that a mere 100+ years ago people could be intimately part of one's life, but (at least in the novelistic view of the world) essentially treated as furniture.  
% * Page 710: "Poor Mrs. Bulstrode." --- In the later parts of the novel Eliot more and more uses this construction. She by this point she has described nearly _all_ the characters with a sympathetic 'poor'! Is it possible that Eliot was starting to feel sorry for the miseries she put all these characters through?  
%  
% Why Middlemarch is a novel about male domination:  
% * Page 82: "Surely I am in a strangely selfish weak state of mind," she said to herself. "How can I have a husband who is so much above me without knowing that he needs me less than I need him?"  
% * Page 84: "Yes, but not my style of woman: I like a woman who lays herself out a little more to please us. There should be a little filigree about a woman---something of the coquette. A man likes a sort of challenge. The more dead set she makes at you the better."  
% * Page 84: "Ay, to be sure, there should be a little devil in a woman," said Mr. Chinchely, whose study of the fair sex seemed to have been detrimental to his theology. "And I like them blond, with a certain gait, and a swan neck."  
% * Page 190: "I hope you are thoroughly satisfied with our stay---I mean, with the result so far as your studies are concerned," said Dorothea, trying to keep her mind fixed on what most affected her husband.  
% * Page 190: "I hope when we get to Lowick, I shall be more useful to you, and be able to enter a little more into what interests you."  
% * Page 254: He held it one of the prettiest attitudes of the feminine mind to adore a man's pre-eminence without too precise a knowledge of what it consisted in.  
% * Page 261: When would the days begin of that active wifely devotion which was to strengthen her husband's life and exalt her own?  
% * Page 261: In this solemnly pledged union of her life, duty would present itself in some new form of inspiration and give new meaning to wifely love.  
% * Page 271: Her little hands were clasped, and enclosed by Sir James's as a bud is enfolded by a liberal calyx.  
% * Page 336: He felt as if already breathed upon by exquisite wedded affection such as would be bestowed by an accomplished creature who venerated his high musings and momentous labours and would never interfere with them; who would create order in the home and accounts with still magic, yet keep her fingers ready to touch the lute and transform life into romance at any moment; who was instructed to the true womanly limit and not a hair's-breadth beyond--docile, therefore, and ready to carry out behests which came from beyond that limit.  
% * Page 340: He relied much on the psychological difference between what for the sake of variety I will call goose and gander: especially on the innate submissiveness of the goose as beautifully corresponding to the strength of the gander.  
% * Page 370: "We must not have you getting too learned for a woman, you know."  
% * Page 389: Will any one guess towards which of these widely different men Mary had a peculiar women's tenderness? -- the one she was most inclined to be severe on? Or the contrary?  
% * Page 414: How delightful to make captives from the throne of marriage with a husband as crown-prince by your side -- himself in fact a subject -- while the captives look up for ever hopeless, losing their rest probably, and if their appetites too, so much the better!  
% * Page 433: "Is that enough music for you, my lord?" she said, folding her hands before her and putting on a little air of meekness.  
% * Page 552: Her baby had been born prematurely, and all the embroidered robes and caps had to be laid by in darkness. This misfortune was attributed entirely to her having persisted in going out on horseback one day when her husband had desired her not to do so; but is must not be supposed that she had shown temper on the occasion, or rudely told him that she  would do as she liked.  
% * Really, this book could be read as being ABOUT male domination of women:  
	% * Dorothea is absolutely servile to Casaubon, but he isn't worthy of her service; she needs to find someone who is  
	% * Mary holds out her service to Fred as a carrot to improve his character, and will only give it to him when he is worthy of it  
	% * Rosamond doesn't do as the worthy Lydgate tells her, and she loses her baby  
	% * Celia is a perfect wife to the good Sir James and is rewarded with a healthy baby she and Dorothea sit around and admire.  
	% * This book came out in 1871, Frankenstein was written in 1818 --- so it's not like there weren't other female authors addressing bigger topics than who the women in town will marry, and who will get the inheritance. This book would really have benefited by having a war in it. It feels a little like such a talented writer as George Eliot was wasted on such mundane subjects.  
	% * George Eliot was in an open marriage --- it's possible she really had a very specific vision of what relationships between men and women should be.  
% * Page 618: He was prepared to be indulgent towards feminine weakness, but not towards feminine dictation. The shallowness of a waternixies's soul may have a charm until she becomes didactic.  
% * Page 628: Lydgate sat paralysed by opposing impulses: since no reasoning he could apply to Rosamond seemed likely to conquer her assent, he wanted to smash and grind some object on which he could at least produce an impression, or else to tell her brutally that he was master, and she must obey. But he not only dreaded the effect of such extremeties on their mutual life --- he had a growing dread of Rosamond's quiet elusive obstinancy, which would not allow any asssertion of power to be final; and again, she had touched him in a spot of keenest feeling by implying that she had been deluded with a false vision of happiness in marrying him.  
% * Page 635: He told himself that it was ten times harder for her than for him: he had a life away from home, and constant appeals to his activitiy on behalf of others. He wished to excuse everything in her if he could --- but it was inevitable that in that excusing mood he should think of her as if she were an animal of another and feebeler species. Nevertheless she had mastered him.  
% * Page 701: "You used to submit to Mr. Casaubon quite shamefully: I think you would have given up ever coming to see me if he had asked you." "Of course I submitted to him, because it was my duty; it was my feeling for him," said Dorothea, looking through the prism of her tears. "They why can't you think it your duty to submit a little to what James wishes?" said Celia, with a sense of stringency in her argument. "Because he only wishes what is for your own good. And, of course, men know best about everything, except what women know better." Dorothea laughed and forgot her tears. "Well, I mean about babies and those things," explained Celia.  
% * Page 789: "Because I've always loved him. I should never like scolding any one else so well; and that is a point to be thought of in a husband."  
% * Page 796: He once called her his basil plant; and when she asked for an explanation, said that basil was a plant which had flourished wonderfully on a murdered man's brains.  
  
  
 
  
@book{shirer2011rise,  
  title={The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich},  
  author={Shirer, W.L.},  
  isbn={9780795317002},  
  url={https://books.google.com/books?id=fpFbuCKOLKwC},  
  year={2011},  
  publisher={RosettaBooks},  
  comment={The classic in-depth history of the rise of the Nazi Party in Germany up to and through WWII.},  
  category={Humanity, history, wwii, nazis, hitler},  
}  
% He begins the book with Santayana's quote about those who do not  
% remember the past being condemned to relive it. As if understanding  
% the rise of the Nazi's will help us prevent it in the future.  
% I believe that's up for debate, but it clearly doesn't really apply to  
% Trump. There are SO many differences between Trump and Hitler. Shirer  
% makes a strong argument that the rise of the Nazis simply couldn't  
% have happened without the specific man Hitler. It's an astonishing  
% thing to think about, but Hitler brought a specific insane evil genius  
% to the Nazis that would have left them basically powerless without  
% him. Unlike Trump who is just an evil idiot and it can be easily  
% imagined how 100 other monsters could have easily been in his place  
% instead of him. Hitler had a whole army already by the time he got any  
% real power, and using that army for violence to show strength was one  
% of his key tactics. It's hard to imagine anything like that with  
% Trump. The only thing that is similar is the use of lower-middle  
% working class anger to stir up political support.  
% In reality, those who remember the past are condemned to be shocked  
% by the ability of fresh new horrors to arise from almost anywhere.  
% A person who studies history with the idea that there are patterns  
% that could repeat is doomed to never understand the real risks of bad  
% things happening.  
% Hitler _believed_ in the power of a single man to shape history - he  
% also believed that a dictator was a _real_ option for running a  
% country. I think neo-Nazis don't actually have ANY sense that a  
% dictator is a good option - their motivation is to engage in racism  
% without feelings of guilt, and in no small part, want to piss off  
% mainstream thinking.  
% The idea that a single person has such influence feels very outdated  
% now. Today, the _systems_ are more powerful than any individual - and  
% not fully understood by any individual, as Adam Curtis points out. It's  
% a RADICALLY different time than the rise of the Nazis. The SYSTEMS run  
% things, Trump could be swapped out with a hundred other horrible  
% people. And Trump is far from all powerful - his entire time in power  
% has been battling the system that crushes him - but that's not to say  
% that his opponents have any more control over the system than he does.  
% Page 8: how Hitler almost had the last name of Schicklgruber. Both  
% Shirer and Hitler himself point out that he probably would not have  
% achieved much if he hadn't had the name Hitler instead. The power of a  
% name cost millions of people their lives.  
% Page 19: Hitler's attempt at art, includes ads for Teddy's  
% Perspiration powder and Santa Claus selling candles.  
% Page 21: Hitler's dedication to the power of violence to show  
% strength.  
% Page 25: Hitler's realization of the power of oratory.  
% Page 43-44: Hitler designs the Nazi flag. Interesting stuff here:  
% he's a failed artist, but there's no question that a _design_ piece  
% the Nazi flag is among the most effective things ever made. The  
% description of ancient swastikas here, and the somewhat mysterious  
% adoption of it by Hitler makes one think that this symbol that's been  
% with us for all of humanity might have contained some trans-temporal  
% sense of what it would become? Maybe it always HAS been the Nazi  
% symbol, has ALWAYS been evil, so evil that the ancients had a sense of its  
% importance long before the Nazis were invented? Considered in light of  
% the more crazy mathematical solutions to theoretical physics, it  
% starts to seem like an interesting idea... Though obviously not  
% ACTUALLY science or history.  
% Also the flag said "Germany Awake!" on it - raising interesting  
% questions about the idea of being "woke".  
% Page 56: The constitution of the Weimar Republic was modern,  
% well-balanced, and had strong representation. See also critiques in  
% footnote on this page.  
% Page 61: In 1923 it took 4 billion marks to buy a dollar.  
% In the 1920s the government let the value of the mark tumble, as a way  
% to free themselves from debt, and escape reparations.  
% Page 96: Late 19th Century Germany had the most comprehensive social  
% security network maybe in the world. It profoundly influenced the  
% working class by making them value security, and seeing the state as  
% benefactor and protector. Hitler took advantage of this. (In footnote.)  
% Page 100, footnote: Nietzsche said in Thus Spoke Zarathustra "Thou  
% goest to women? Do not forget they whip!" Bertrand Russell said of this  
% "Nine women out of ten would have got that whip away from him, and he  
% knew it, so he kept away from women."  
% Page 144: Deutsche Bank on the list of banks that financed Hitler.  
% Page 195: The cardinal error of the Germans who opposed Nazism was  
% their failure to unite against it.   
% Page 185: "Fourteen years of sharing political power in the Republic,  
% of making all the compromises necessary to maintain coalition  
% governments, had sapped the strength and the zeal of the Social  
% Democrats until their party had become little more than an opportunist  
% pressure organization, determined to bargain for concessions for the  
% trade unions on which their strength largely rested"  
% Page 212: Hitler wins a staggering (if questionably honest) election  
% victory because the German people appreciated his defiance of the  
% outside world.  
% Page 223: The purge of the S.A. resembles the settling of all debts  
% scene in the Godfather.  
% Page 227: German officers fell back on their honor codes, often  
% citing "honor" as the reason for supporting the Nazi state. And thus by  
% honoring their oath, they dishonored themselves as human beings.  
% Page 232: Before the war, Nazi Germany was open to visitors, and the  
% tourist industry thrived.   
% Page 240: The Nazis persecuted the Christians too, since Christianity  
% was considered incompatible with Nazism. The Nazi Church required the  
% removal of crosses from churches and that they be replaced with a copy  
% of Mein Kampf on the altar, and a sword. And of course a swastika.  
% Page 244: the story of the terrible Nazi art show, and the popular  
% "degenerate art" show.  
% Page 248: "No one who had not lived for years in a totalitarian  
% land can possible conceive how difficult it is to escape the dread  
% consequences of a regime's calculated and incessant propaganda."  
% Page 259: Prussia during the 18th and 19th centuries spent 5/7 of the  
% government's revenue on the military. The economy was part of military  
% policy, not people' welfare.  
% Page 260: The Nazi government would create alternate currency to pay  
% industrialists, like the Mefo bill.  
% Page 266 and 267: How Volkswagon got its start (but not successfully)  
% under Hitler.  
% Page 271: The Nazis would arbitrarily arrest people and put them in  
% concentration camps and call it "protective custody"  
% Page 273: People paid to spy on the general population of Germans for  
% the Nazis were young intellectuals recruited from universities. So there  
% was a bizarre atmosphere of pedantry and an interest in things like the  
% skulls of inferior people and the eugenics of the master race.  
% Page 327: Hitler intends to build the greatest skyscrapers the world  
% has seen.  
% Page 338: Any time an opponent concedes something to the Nazis, they  
% raise the stakes and demand more.  
% Page 424-427: The results of Munich: Here, again, you can see how  
% it was mostly just Hitler's "luck" that allowed him to succeed so  
% spectacularly. Chamberlain was committed to appeasement for fear of  
% another major war. Hitler was committed to war, fully intending to  
% invade Czechoslovakia. Later analysis shows that Chamberlain was  
% completely wrong to appease Hitler - the combined forces of Europe  
% would have easily defeated him at the time (if the plot to overthrow  
% him by the German generals had been executed and failed). And Hitler  
% was wrong to think he even COULD have attacked Czechoslovakia - which  
% had near-impregnable mountain defenses built against German attacks.  
% Appeasement SAVED Hitler from his own intentions which would have  
% defeated him, and gave him a chance he didn't know he needed to build up  
% further strength. Nobody knew that at the time - it is just the random  
% twists and turns of history that repeatedly let Hitler succeed.  
%  
% Page 966: Hitler and the Nazis started mass execution of the jews early  
% because they didn't have the patience to work them to death, nor the  
% foresight of the value of slave labor. (Stalin, maybe learning from the  
% Nazis, didn't make this mistake. See Gulag.)  
  
  
  
  
@article{lethem2016curtis,  
  Author={Lethem, Jonathan},  
  url={http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/10/30/magazine/adam-curtis-documentaries.html},  
  Title={It All Connects},  
  journal={The New York Times},  
  date={2016-11-27},  
  comment={A profile of Adam Curtis, the British documentary maker who tackles politics and culture. ``The films take familiar subjects — the Cold War, the growth of public relations or financial or military-industrial bureaucracies, the premises of the ecology or anti-psychiatry movements, the enmeshment of Western democracies in quasi-colonial military adventures in the Middle East — and render them strange. Stories that might seem like “social studies” fodder become, in Curtis’s hands, compulsive, like a giddy horror film you can’t quit watching.'' He is a master of finding obscure archival footage from the BBC archive and compiling it into a narrative explaining 20th Century history in a completely new way. His most famous films include: ``If Americans like Morris and myself have tended to learn of Curtis’s work beginning with “The Power of Nightmares,” his British viewers usually started earlier, with his landmark treatises on the biases of technological utopian social thinking (“Pandora’s Box,” 1992); on propaganda, historical amnesia, brainwashing and nostalgia (“The Living Dead,” 1995); on the growth of popular psychiatry and public relations, and the merging of the cult of personal fulfillment with consumerist imperatives (“The Century of the Self,” 2002). “The Century of the Self,” in particular, is seen by many in Britain as Curtis’s signature accomplishment. These early works construct a kind of “bible” of Curtis’s thinking, upon which his later arguments build.'' },  
  category={century of self, propaganda, adam curtis, Politics, Economics, Criticality, The Art, documentaries}  
}  
% Other interesting quotes from this article:  
``“This is the whole thing about ‘good and evil’ — it’s a naïve view of the world. The problem is bigger, it’s a system.” Curtis and I briefly discussed a word coined by the critic Timothy Morton to describe a problem so vast in space and time that you are unable to apprehend it: a “hyperobject.” Global warming is a classic example of a hyperobject: it’s everywhere and nowhere, too encompassing to think about. Global markets, too. But naming a hyperobject alone is of limited use; human cognition knows all too well how to file such imminent imponderables away, on a “to-do” list that’s never consulted again.''  
% ``“One week I was sent up to Edinburgh to film a singing dog,” he said. “His owner said that when he played the bagpipes, the dog would sing Scottish songs. We set the camera up. The owner dressed up in a kilt and started to play the bagpipes. The dog refused to sing. It just sat there looking at me just saying nothing. It just sat there, with a really smug look on its face. This went on for about two hours.” Curtis phoned his producer. “She said: ‘Darling, that is wonderful. Don’t you see that the dog refusing to sing for a man dressed up in a kilt is actually very funny? Go back and keep filming. Film the dog doing nothing. But film the man as well.’ ” “So I did. We ran a long close-up shot of the dog’s face with the sound of out-of-tune bagpipes. It was quite avant-garde, but the audience loved it, especially when you cut it against the face of the man puffing at the bagpipes who genuinely believed that the dog was about to sing. “That time with a dog taught me the fundamental basics of journalism. That what really happens is the key thing; you mustn’t try and force the reality in front of you into a predictable story. What you should do is notice what is happening in front of your eyes, and what instinctively your reaction is.''  
% ``Curtis prefers Balzac, the novelist of intricate social tapestries, to the modernist tradition of interiority defined by Woolf and Proust. But the novelist he claims as inspiration is Dos Passos, whose “U.S.A.” trilogy he read when he was a boy, and whose centrifugal blend of pastiche and documentation may be the key to Curtis’s style. At the other end, Curtis’s artistic nemesis is Andy Warhol. “I’ve got this idea. I call it the I.A.R., the Inappropriate Aesthetic Response. I date it back to Warhol. It’s this idea you can take horrific images like the electric chair and aestheticize them. The beheading videos, the orange jumpsuits against the desert background; ISIS uses that knowingly. I have a ruthless theory, that the radical-art movement, which grew out of the failure of revolutionary politics, becomes the outriders for the property developers. You need the aesthetic of decline in order to make those buildings desirable.” “HyperNormalisation” is a summation of one of Curtis’s major themes: that liberalism — since the collapse of certainty about how its values would transform politics, finance and journalism — has in fact become genuinely conservative. In a world of unpredictability, it has retreated from genuine frontiers, instead opting for holding actions that can make it feel stable and safe.''  
% ``Curtis’s critiques of the internet sometimes echo those of skeptics like Jaron Lanier, who sees it as a dead end for art, and Evgeny Morozov, who questions its ability to effect social change. “The internet was invented by engineers,” Curtis tells me. “When engineers build a bridge, they don’t want it to develop, they want it to stay stable. And the same is true of the fundamental engineering system of the internet. It’s based on feedback. And feedback is about stability. So, what happened with Occupy, and with Tahrir Square, is that it was a great system to get everyone together into a group, but then it had absolutely no content. It’s a really terrible mistake they made — they mistook an engineering system for a revolutionary set of ideas.”''  
% ``Elsewhere, Curtis sounds like a science-fiction writer — one from the 1950s, when S.F. writers began accurately satirizing the world we find ourselves in today. “The utopia they hold out is a world where machines make everything for you and you have endless leisure time, you become creative and everyone’s happy. And the only thing is, actually, everyone’s incredibly unhappy because they haven’t got anything to do. What we call our jobs today are actually fake jobs. We sit in our offices in front of our screens in order to get the money to go out and buy stuff. Our job is really to go shopping. And the rest of the time, we sit in our offices doing complicated managerial things, and when we’re not, we’re actually watching the internet. The internet is there to keep you happy during your fake job.” Curtis’s antic side, however, can’t turn away from the bloody wreckage. “I see people in shops now, going through Instagram, and then looking at things like ‘Is this right?’ It’s almost like they’re reading the Bible. It’s absolutely fascinating. Instagram is the aestheticization of everything. What began with Modernism, which is to actually worry about how things are done rather than about what they’re saying, has now ended with Instagram. I love it.''  
% ``“What will happen to the internet in the future?” He’s riffing again. “Will it become a bit like a John Carpenter movie? You go there, amidst the ruins, and it’s weird, and you can be nasty — just have fun and be bad, like a child. From about ’96 to about 2005 people built these lovely websites, they put up masses and masses of fantastic information. They’ve left them sitting there, but it’s like a city that everyone’s gone from. And what’s come in instead is a weird world where you don’t know what’s real — just people shouting at each other. It’s good fun, but it’s not real.”''  
% ``Curtis seems to cherish his place in America as a voice seeping from under the floorboards. In a way, the ruined apocalyptic John Carpenter city appears to be where he wants to live.''  
% ``Speaking of “The Power of Nightmares,” he told me, “A lot of people said, ‘Oh, the television networks in America would never show it.’ What I’d noticed is that the moment I put it out, it went up on the internet. I understood at that point that it would have more political power and be seen by many more people if I let it be a thing that people want to find illegally.” (Virtually all of Curtis’s films are available to the intrepid Googler for free viewing, but if I told you where to find them, they might vanish.)''  
% On seeing HyperNormalisation: poses the idea that the world has become so complicated that nobody can control it anymore. Instead people in power simply try to prevent disasters from occuring - mostly through "perception management". Reality doesn't matter, only people's perception of it, which is maleable.  
% There is an amazing sequence of disaster movies featuring actors with wide-eyed stares at some horror of destruction (usually a collapsing building) set to Dream Baby Dream by Suicide - all movies leading up to 2001.   
% Also poses the idea that liberals rerteated from reality to cyberspace (which is now mostly online videos) --- because it was too complicated to understand, and the protests of the iraq war suggested that they couldn't change reality.  
% This article is about the BlackRock data center in Washington state, Aladdin,  that Adam Curtis talks about in HyperNormalisation: \url{http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21591164-getting-15-trillion-assets-single-risk-management-system-huge-achievement}  
% On seeing Pandora's box: In a number of these documentaries there's points where the people in power are embarrassed that their ideas didn't work, and so their next step is not to admit failure, but to try something new without admitting they were wrong.  
% This makes me think that a major tool for change is to recognize that you have to give the politicians a chance to get out of what they have done without having to admit they were wrong. Perhaps the right KIND of protest or riot - or asking for the right thing, might give a politician the opportunity to get out and save face: "not because I was wrong, but because we need peace in the streets, I am changing course"  
% Adam Curtis might be one of the few (or only) people dealing with the systems of power by trying to think about them systematically. Or at least he's one of the only one's doing it in a way that's comprehensible to normal people.  
% Think of his construction, "they believed that...". He uses it all the time. It's a whole WAY of thinking about power - that the people in power don't KNOW anything, they just BELIEVE something, and try to apply what they believe. More often than not, they are wrong.  
% See notes following kudler2017urbanpolitics  
% The movie Cube (1997) features a giant machine which appears to have no purpose but to torture people. It is revealed during the movie that it is a huge public works project - a bridge to nowhere - that was begun, then continually funded and built because nobody really knew what it was or what it was for. After being completed people are put into it simply because it exists and therefore should be used. The monologue where this is explained bears uncanny resemblences to Adam Curtis' current thinking about world power systems.  
  
  
  
@book{mccarthy1989blood,  
  title={Blood Meridian, Or, The Evening Redness in the West},  
  author={McCarthy, C.},  
  url={https://books.google.com/books?id=cNnWjwEACAAJ},  
  year={1992},  
  publisher={Vintage International Edition},  
  comment={The fictionalized retelling of the adventures of the Glanton gang in 19th Century Mexico.},  
  category={Novels, The Art, old west, violence, 19th century, scalping, gunpowder, weapons}  
}  
% One of the best books I ever read.  
% It makes me wonder about the creation of masterpieces. For our culture to generate one single masterpiece like this, does it mean we need to be able to support authors like McCarthy through all the weak books he wrote before (and AFTER) Blood Meridian?  
% "You can find meanness in the least of creatures, but when God made man the devil was at his elbow. A creature that can do anything. Make a machine. And a machine to make the machine. And evil can run itself a thousand years, no need to tend it." Page 19.  
% "slept with their alien hearts beating in the sand like pilgrims exhausted upon the face of the planet Anareta" Page 46. Planet Anareta is the planet in astrology that signals the end of the world." Page 46  
% "That night they rode though a region electric and wild where strange shapes of soft blue fire ran over the metal f the horses' trappings and the wagonwheels rolled in hoops of fire and little shapes of pale blue light came to perch in the ears of the horses and in the beards of the men. All night sheetlightning quaked sourceless to the west beyond the midnight thunderheads, making a bluish day of the distant desert, the mountains on the sudden skyline stark and black and livid like a land of some other order out there whose true geology was not stone but fear. The thunder moved up from the southwest and lightning lit the desert all about them, blue and barren, great clanging reaches ordered out of the absolute night like some demon kingdom summoned up or changeling land that come the day would leave them neither trace nor smoke nor ruin more than any troubling dream." Page 47  
% Description of Apache attack. Page 52-53  
% Description of the Glanton gang, "short twobarreled rifles with bores you could stick your thumbs in and the trappings of their horses fashioned out of human skin and their bridles woven up from human hair and decorated with human teeth and the riders wearing scapulars of necklaces of dried and blackened human ears" Page 78.  
% Description of the giant pistols of the Glanton gang, concluding with "in that courtyard other than merchants and buyers were a number of living things." Page 82  
% "The white man looked up drunkenly and the black stepped forward and with a single stroke swept off his head. Two thick ropes of dark blood and two slender rose like snakes from the stump of the nect and arched hissing into the fire." The killing of white Jackson by black Jackson. Page 107.  
% "He had with him that selfsame rifle you see with him now, all mounted in german silver and the name that he'd give it set with silver wire under the checkpiece in latin: Et In Arcadia Ego. A reference to the lethal in it. Common enough for a man to name his gun. I've heard sweetlips and Hark From The Tombs and every sort of lady's name. HIs is the first and only ever I seen with an inscription from the classics." Page 125  
% The judge mixing gunpowder on the run from indians in the wilderness. And the slaughter of indian on the volcano. Page 131-134. "I didn't know but what we'd be required to bleed into it like freemasons but it was not so. He worked it up dry with his hands an dall the while the savages down there on the plain drawin night to us and when I turned back the judge was standin, the great hairless oaf, and he'd look out his pizzle and he was pissin into the mixture, pissig with a great vengeance and one hand aloft and he cried out for us to do likewise." Page 131 bottom to 132 continuing.  
% "The way of the world is to bloom and to flower and die but in the affairs of men there is no waning and the noon of his expression signals the onset of night." Page 146. This is where the judge uses the concept of the meridian.  
% The attack on the village, the Deleware smash baby heads against rocks. Page 156  
% "All about her the dead lay with their peeled skulls like polyps bluely wet or luminescent melons cooling on some mesa of the moon." Page 174  
% "The universe is no narrow thing and the order within it is not constrained by any latitude in its conception to repeat what exists in one part in any other part. Even in this world more things exist without our knowledge than with it and the order in creation which you see is that which you have put there, like a string in a maze, so that you shall not lose your way. For existence has its own order and that no man's mind can compass, that mind itself being but a fact among others." Page 245  
% Brown going to the farrier and demanding he cut down the barriers of a royal shotgun, and the farrier refusing. Page 265  
% The slaughter of the buffalo by the tens-of-thousands. Page 316.  
  
  
  
  
@article{mumford1961city,  
  title={The city in history. its origins, its transformation, and its prospects},  
  author={Mumford, Lewis},  
  year={1961},  
  publisher={Harcourt. Brace \& world},  
  comment = {The classic tome in which Mumford looks deeply at the long history of cities and tries to tease out the specifics aspects that let them thrive or caused them to fail. Mumford has a deep appreciation of social justice (and a lot of criticism of ``modern'' (that is, 1960s) life is slipped in) but he also comes from a school (garden cities) that believed there was a perfect size and organization of cities that could be achieved. Those things are what he looks for. So, Rome is examined in light of its eventual failure. Eventually in Rome 1/3 of the days of the year are holidays. (Many of those holidays are circuses, with elephants and tigers and whatnot. Mumford postulates that the remnant of those carried down as a subculture for thousands of years to the circus we have today.) For Mumford, Rome's vices cause it to miss the perfect city size/relationship, and it grows huge solely on econimic power, causing it to fail.},  
  category = {classics, tomes, cities, history}  
}  
% See also: http://www.wnyc.org/story/206665-lewis-mumford/  
% Mumford's idea of how the dark ages ended: people were scattered widely around the countryside in Europe. The Vikings got organized in warfare, and started attacking along the coast, and deep into the countryside. People in started building walls around the towns (again - this technique had been lost since Roman times.) The walls created safe spaces for merchants, markets and capitalism to thrive, cities grew, and trade and science reestablished themselves.   
% Look up the Cloacina  
% Quotes:  
% ``democracies are often too stingy in spending money for public purposes, for its citizens feel the money is theirs. Monarchies and tyrannies can be generous, because they dip their hands freely into other people's pockets.''  
% ``What goes so lavishly into space rockets of our time went, with perhaps little more visible reward, into equally monumental architecture almost equally empty of human benefit. In both cases, paranoid power learned to 'rationalize' the expression of its irrationality by its homage to art or science.''  
%``From the standpoint of both politics and urbanism, Rome remains a significant lesson of what to avoid: its history presents a series of classic danger signals to warn one when life is moving in the wrong direction. Wherever crowds gather in suffocating numbers, wherever rents rise steeply and housing conditions deteriorate, wherever a one-sided exploitation of distant territories removes the pressure to achieve balance and harmony nearer at hand, there the precedents of Roman building almost automatically revive, as they have come back today: the arena, the tall tenement, the mass contests and exhibitions, the football matches, the international beauty contests, the strip-tease made ubiquitous by advertisement, the constant titillation of the senses by sex, liquor, and violence – all in true Roman style. These are symptoms of the end: magnifications of demoralized power, minifications of life. When these signs multiply, Necropolis is near, though not a stone has yet crumbled. For the barbarian has already captured the city from within. Come hangman! Come vulture!'' Page 242  
% ``Instead of evading the ugly realities of his time, the Christian embraced them. by doing willingly what pagans sedulously avoided, he both neutralized and in some measure overcame the forces that threatened him. He visited the sick; he comforted the widow and the orphan; he redeemed the ignominies of starvation, sickness, and squalor by making them am occasion for fellowship and love. Instead of clinging for security and comfort to the presense of large crowds, he accepted their dispersal and looked for solace in a more intimate union when only two or three were gathered together in the name of Christ: indeed, the holiest withdrew altogether, seeking solitude and silence.'' page 244  
% ``Cities are like trees; once established, they must be destroyed to the roots before they cease to live: otherwise, even when the main stem is cut down, shoots will form about the base as happened in Jerusalem even after its complete destruction in A.D. 70. What Lavedan calls the ``law of the persistence of the place'' might even be widened into the ``persistence of the individual urban archetype.'' page 245  
% ``In the past half century architecture has turned from enclosure to exposure: a virtual replacement of the wall by the window. Even in the dwelling house, as Henry James was quick to note on his visit to the United States in 1905, all sense of intimacy and privacy was being forfeited by throwing one room into another, to create a kind of exposed public space for every moment and for every function. This movement has perhaps now reached the natural terminus of every such arbitrary interpretation of human needs. In opening our buildings to the untempered glare of daylight and the outdoors, we have forgotten, at our peril and to our loss, the coordinate need for contrast, for quiet, for darkness, for privacy, for an inner retreat.'' page 269  
% Medieval guild halls: ``But those that have been preserved often vie in their magnificence with the town hall or cathedral. W. J. Ashley notes that the cost of these buildings was ``one of the circumstances which led to the restriction of the membership to more wealthy members of the community. Not the first or the last time in which the pomp of a great architectural shell has destroyed the creature who burdened himself with its creation....'' Page 271  
% ``But in the university, the pursuit of knowledge was elevated into an enduring structure, which did not depend for its continuance upon any single group of priests, scholars, or texts. The system of knowledge was more important than the thing known.'' Page 276  
% ``Those who refer to the winding streets of such a town as mere tracings of the cowpath do not realize that the cow's habit of following contours usually produces a more economical and sensible layout on hilly sites than any inflexible system of straight streets.'' Page 301. So - grids are great in 2-dimensional space, but cowpaths work better if the site has 3 dimensions.  
% ``Even town-planning theorists have made such errors, largely because of their failure to grasp the difference, familiar to students of biology, between homologous and analogous forms. A similar form does not necessarily have a similar significance in a different culture; again similar functions may produce quite different forms.'' Page 301  
% ``Not without statesmanlike cunning, the Pope insisted on making the Franciscan order an instrument of Papal power, and he ensured its subordination, indeed its inner subversion, by encouraging a heavy investment in appropriate conventual buildings, in the very birthplace of the new order; for there is no quicker way of killing an idea than to `materialize' it too soon.'' Page 319   
% ``The canals, now some 177 in all, serve as the boundaries of these neighborhoods, as well as connecting links: they are both waterbelts and arterial highways, functioning like the greenbelts and through motor ways of a well-designed modern town, though not so reckless of urban space as American highways or the neighborhood greenbelts of English New Towns frequently are. \ldots By making the most of their opportunities, in other words, the Venetians, no doubt inadvertently, invented a new type of city, based on the differentiation and zoning of urban functions, separated by traffic ways and open spaces. This was zoning on the grandest scale, practiced in a rational manner, which recognized the integrity of neighborhoods and which minimized the wasteful `journey to work.' Page 323  
% ``The urban community was kept in some degree of balance because its ruling group at least paid the price for their system, as totalitarian states do today, by trading security for freedom: thus they provided over many centuries for steady industrial employment, social services of many sorts, and dazzling public festivals. So, typically, it was not the workers, but rival members of the ruling class that usually threatened treason or revolt.'' Page 324 So - by taking care of the working classes, they didn't have to worry about revolt from below, but from a coup of their colleagues who couldn't do whatever they pleased with the working classes.  
% On the changeover to guns as the primary weapons of war: ``The need for more costly sinews of war put the cities into the hands of usurious oligarchies that financed the ruler's mischievous politics, lived sumptuously on the profits and the loot, and sought to entrench their positions by backing the ensuing despotism.'' [there's a little more on this page - 361]  
% It's kind of amazing how anyone living through that process probably didn't even realize it was happening. Long-term trends like that seem to need hundreds of years of hindsight.  
% Mumford references ``Sombart'' (presumably in the bibliography): ``Soldiers, as Sombart has pointed out, are pure consumers, even as in action they are negative producers.'' - To keep a standing army is to simply buy tons of stuff without them ever actually producing anything. Page 362.    
% ``The change from a goods economy to a money economy greatly widened the resources of the state. \ldots To increase the boundaries of the state was to increase the taxable population: to increase the population of the capital city was to increase the rent of land. \ldots Capitalism in turn became militaristic: it relied on the arms of the state when it could no longer bargain to advantage without them: the foundations of colonial exploitation and imperialism.'' page 363-364  
% ``The long approach and vista into seemingly unbounded space---those typical marks of the baroque plan---were first discovered by the painter.'' And from here he goes on to fashion, and then to history. From war to fashion in two pages! page 365  
% ``The gain in the power of systematic thought and in the accurate prediction of physical events was to justify itself in the nineteenth century in a series of mighty advances in technics. But in society the habit of thinking in terms of abstractions worked out disastrously. The new order established in the physical sciences was far too limited to describe or interpret social facts, and until the nineteenth century even the legitimate development of statistical analysis played little part in sociological thought. Real men and women, real corporations and cities, were treated in law and government as if they were imaginary bodies; whilst artful pragmatic fictions, like Divine Right, Absolute Rule, the State, Sovereignty, were treated as if they were realities. \ldots With the quest for financial and political power, the notion of limits disappeared---limits on numbers, limits on wealth, limits on population growth, limits on urban expansion: on the contrary, quantitative expansion became predominant. The merchant cannot be too rich; the state cannot possess too much territory; the city cannot become too big. Success in life was identified with expansion. This superstition retains its hold in the notion of an indefinitely expanding economy.'' Page 366  
% ```The world,' as Stow remarked when the fashion was taking hold in London, `runs on wheels.''' Page 368  
% ``In walking the eye courts variety, but above this gait, movement demands repetition of the units that are to be seen: it is only so that the individual part, as it flashes by, can be recovered and pieced together. What would be monotony for a fixed position or even in procession, becomes a necessary counterpoise to the pave of fast-moving horses.'' Page 368  
% ``On irregular streets, poorly paved, with plenty of loose cobblestones and places of concealment, the spontaneous formations of untrained people have an advantage over a drilled soldierly: soldiers cannot fire around corners, nor can they protect themselves from bricks heaved from chimney tops immediately overhead: they need space to maneuver in. \ldots To rule merely by coercion, without affectionate consent, one must have the appropriate urban background.'' Page 369-370 [Does this suggest that in addition to the right to bear arms, we should compel the government to provide us with irregular and hard to understand street systems? it would, after all, help the resistance fight the battle to keep the government honest!]  
% During what Mumford calls the Baroque period, there was a split in use types: homes were split from workplaces. Producing, selling, and consuming were separated into three different institutions, and three different sets of buildings, three distinct parts of the city. The housewife loses touch with affairs of the outside world, and works instead only on domesticity or sex. Increased domesticity also weakened public interest of middle-class citizens. Page 383  
% ``To make up for the lack of effective domestic work, a new type of housework was invented that took up the slack and enriched the ritual of conspicuous consumption. I mean the care of furniture. \ldots Display outstripped use; and the care of furniture commanded time that once went to weaving tapestries, the embroidery of garments, the mailing of useful household preserves, perfumes and simples. These new burdens were inflicted upon housewives and domestics at the very moment that the form of the house itself changes, multiplying the number of private chambers...'' Page 383  
% ``Up to the seventeenth century, at least in the North, building and heating had hardly advanced far enough to permit the arrangement of a series of private rooms in a dwelling. But now a separation of functions too place within the house as well as within the city as a whole. Space became specialized, room by room.'' Page 384  
% In context of Da Vinci and the Italian ``bulldozing'' habit of mind: ``The wholesale remove of the buildings embodying these forms of life [human households, shops, churches, neighborhoods] would wipe out the co-operations and fidelities of a lifetime, often many lifetimes. The in making a `clean job' the planner would have to destroy precious social organ that could not be replaced as easily as streets can be paved and houses build did not seem important to the early military engineer and more than it seems to his twentieth-century successors, in charge of `slum clearance projects' or highway designs.'' Page 387  
% ``Living space, in the baroque plan, was treated as a leftover, after the avenue itself determined the shape of the houseplot and the depth of block. With this neglect of urban functions other than traffic went an overvaluation on the geometric figure: a square\ldots a nine-sided figure with radio-centric streets,\ldots a partial star \ldots The abstract figure delimits the social contents, instead of being derived from them and in some degree conforming to them. The institutions of the city no longer generate the plan: the function of the plan is rather to bring conformity to the prince's will in institutions.''  
% ``If one compares the handsome geometry of a baroque plan with the kind of patient, piecemeal replacement and modification suggested in Rowland Nicholas' plans for the rebuilding of Manchester, one discover the specious advantages of this administrative superficiality.'' Page 402. Might be worth looking up those Manchester plans.  
% ``Once wheeled traffic is treated as the chief concern of planning, there will never be enough space to keep it from becoming congested, or a high enough residential density to provide taxes sufficient to cover its exorbitant demands.'' Page 405  
% ``What steamship companies discovered in the nineteenth century in their exploitation of steerage passengers, the ground landlords discovered long before: maximum profits came, not from providing first class accommodations for those who could well afford them at a handsome fee, but from crowded slum accommodations, for those whose pennies were scarcer than the rich man's pounds.'' Page 417. This is a pretty amazing statement, it suggests that in capitalism, you will never get as rich offering _options_ to people who can afford them, as you can selling _necessities_ to people who can't afford them.  
% ``If a layout of a town has no relation to human needs and activities other than business, the pattern of the city may be simplified: the ideal layout for the business man is that which can be most swiftly reduced to standard monetary units for purchase and sale. The fundamental unit is no longer the neighborhood or precinct, but the individual building low, whose value can be gauged in terms of front feet: this favors an oblong with a narrow frontage and great depth, which provides a minimum amount of light and air to buildings, particularly to dwellings, that conform to it.'' Page 421-422  
% ``With this blank formal layout, no thought was given to either the direction of the prevailing winds, the circumscription of industrial districts, the salubrity of the underlying soil, or any of the other vital factors that determine the proper utilization of an urban site. As for orientation of buildings for maximum exposure to winter sunlight, that ancient necessity, know to both the Greeks and the Chinese, was completely overlooked, until the principle was belatedly re-established by a series of independent investigators, notably by the French planner, Augustin Rey, early in the twentieth century. And one further lack must be noted: the absence of any functional differentiation between the residential, the industrial, the commercial, and the civic quarters---though if their requirements were respected each would demand blocks of different lengths and depths, with appropriate streets and avenues, to accord with their different loads of traffic, and their functionally different building layouts.'' Page 423-424  
% Mumford references Arturo Soria y Mata's Linear city. He was a Spanish planner who had an early notion of transit oriented development. ``The gridiron plan reached its ideal culmination in Se\~{n}or Soria y Mata's proposal for the Linear City. Himself a transportation engineer, he boldly proposed to make the new city a function of a spinal rapid-transit system, projecting a continuous urban belt parallel to the transportation lines, to connect the old historic centers. Motorized movement was all-controlling.'' Page 425  
% ``In estimating the need for new subways in New York, for example, almost half a century ago, the engineer of the Public Service Commission furnished the classic statement of these aims: ``All lines must necessarily be laid to the objective point---Manhattan. Every transit line that brings people to Manhattan adds to its real estate value. The value of property on Manhattan Island on account of its geographic and commercial location must increase just so long as population in the surrounding territory increases.'' The object of a good transit system might be the more even distribution of industrial and commercial opportunities, of good housing facilities, and even of land values, so that the whole process might have some other aim than enriching the holders of land in Manhattan at the expense of the rest of the metropolitan community, seems not to have occurred to this na\"{i}ve agent.'' page 425  
% ``Hence the peculiar function of the over-developed street in the commercial plan: it was forced to take the place of the back garden and the protected square of the medieval town, or of the open place and park of the baroque order. Thus this paved desert, adapted primarily to wheeled traffic, became also park promenade, and playground: a grim park, a dusty promenade, a dangerous playground.'' Page 427  
% ``Rapid public transportation, instead of reducing the time required for reaching the place of work, continued to increase the distance and cost with no gain in time whatsoever. What holds true for the horizontal extension of the commercial city in the nineteenth century and later, holds true equally for its vertical expansion by means of the elevator.'' Page 430. So you can think of your commute as something that is 3-dimensional if you include the ride up the elevator.  
% ``To understand the source of this congestion, apart from the desire for wringing profits out of the necessities of the poor, unable like their economic superiors to bargain and withhold acceptance, one must realize that by the seventeenth century destitution had been accepted as the normal lot in life for a considerable part of the population. Without the spur of poverty and famine, they could not be expected to work for starvation wages. Misery at the bottom was the foundation for the luxury at the top.'' Page 432  
% ``Part of the economic use of the capital city, was to discredit local goods, which varied in pattern, in color, in stuff, in texture, in decoration, in accordance with local traditions, and give circulation to those in use at the capital.'' Page 437  
% ``In our time the ultimate fate of the commercial city is to become a backdrop for advertising: a fate well symbolized by the recent transformations of New York's two railroad stations from great public monuments to exhibition halls for a commercialism whose tawdriness by contrast gives almost a regal dignity to the financiers who originally conceived these stations with some sense of public obligation.'' Page 445  
% ``Up to the nineteenth century, there had been a rough balance of activities within the city. Though work and trade were always important, religion and art and play claimed their full share of the townsman's energies. But the tendency to concentrate on economic activities, and to regard as waste the time or effort spent on other functions, at least outside the home, had been growing steadily since the sixteenth century.'' Page 446  
% ```Without design' was a laudatory term in the Victorian period. As in the decadent period of Greece, Chance had been elevated into a deity that was supposedly in control not only of human destiny, but of all natural processes as well.'' Page 452. He goes on to tie this idea to Darwin.  
% ``To bring back fresh air, pure water, green open space, and sunlight to the city became the first object of sound planning: the need was so pressing that despite his passion for urban beauty, Camillo Sitte insisted upon the \emph{hygenic} function of the urban part, as a \emph{sanitary green}, to use his own expression: the `lungs' of the city, whose function became newly appreciated through their absence.'' Page 475  
% Webb - 19th century - municipal socialization ``In smaller centers, private companies might be left with the privilege of maintaining one or more of these services, until some notorious outbreak of disease dictated public control; but in the bigger cities socialization was the price of safety; and so, despite the theoretic claims of the laissez faire, the nineteenth century became, as Beatrice and Sidney Webb correctly point out, the century of municipal socialism. Each individual improvement within the building demanded its collectively owned and operated utility: watermains, water reservoirs, and aqueducts, pumping stations: sewage mains, sewage reduction plants, sewage farms.'' Page 476  
% Grave errors of railroads repeated by cars - ``At the very moment the elevated railroad for public transportation was being eliminated as a grave nuisance, these forgetful engineers re-installed the same kind of obsolete structure for the convenience of the motor car.'' Page 479 (mid)  
% modern buildings are above ground versions of underground technology - ``The next step in the city's development, already taken in many American cities, is to extend the principle of the underground city even to the design of buildings that are visibly above ground, and so defeat art at every point. With air conditioning and all-day fluorescent lighting, the internal spaces in the new American skyscraper are little different from what they would be a hundred feet below the surface. No extravagance in mechanical equipment is too great to produce this uniform internal environment: though the technical ingenuity spent on fabricating sealed-in buildings cannot create the equivalent of an organic background for human functions and activities.'' Page 480 - bottom  
% suburban freedom -  ``The great residual freedom of the suburbanite is that of locomotion. For esthetic and intellectual stimulus, the suburb remains dependent upon the big city: the theater, the opera, the orchestra, the art gallery, the university, the museum are no longer a part of the daily environment. The problem of re-establishing connections, on a regional rather than a metropolitan basis, is one of the main problems of city planning in our time.'' 493 (bottom) - 494 (top)  
% Is the above still true? Should we be trying to figure out how to reconnect the suburbs? Or just give up? Or figure out a non-locomotion way to bring the suburbs better connection-like things?  
% The fastest way to move 100k is on foot - ``What an effective network requires is the largest number of alternative modes of transportation, at varying speeds and volumes, for different functions and purposes. The fastest way to move a hundred thousand people within a limited urban area, say a half mile radius, is on foot: the slowest way of moving them would be to put them all into motor cars.'' Page 507 (bottom)  
%  ``The organizers of the ancient city had something to learn from the new rulers of our society. The former massed their subjects within a walled enclosure, under surveillance of armed guardians within a smaller citadel, the better to keep them under control. That method is now obsolete. With the present means of long-distance mass communication, sprawling isolation has proved an even more effective method of keeping a population under control. With direct contact and face-to-face association inhibited as far as possible, all knowledge and direction can be monopolized by central agents and conveyed through guarded channels, too costly to be utilized by small groups or private individuals. To exercise free speech in such a scattered, dissociated community one must `buy time' on the air or `buy space' in the newspaper. Each member of Suburbia becomes imprisoned by by the very separation that he has prized: he is fed through a  narrow opening: a telephone line, a radio band, a television circuit. This is not, it goes without saying, the result of a conscious conspiracy by a cunning minority: it is an organic by-product of an economy that sacrifices human development to mechanical processing.'' Page 513 top  
% Does the above change in light of the internet? Or did we miss an opportunity, when the internet was going to be a two-way thing, the early days when every single person would have their own web page?  
% Howard's term `Garden Cities' isn't really unfortunate, since it is more descriptive of suburbs which are far less dense than Howard was calling for. His plans were distinctly urban, calling for density similar to NYC in 1811. In converse, Letchworth and Welwyn are true Howard garden cities, and should not be mistaken for mere suburbs. - 519 (top)  
% ``So far, then, Howard's proposals have failed to halt or even retard the automatic processes that are at work in our civilization. The underlying reason for this failure is that Western civilization is still carried along by the inertia of three centuries of expansion: land expansion, industry expansion, and population expansion; and these movements have taken place at a rate that would have made public organization and containment difficult, eve if the need for a more stable life-economy had been recognized.'' Page 524 - % But Howard's plan was for only 30k people at a time, how could it even have addressed the scale of what cities have become?  
% Ethereal powers city walls - ``Both the citadel and the wall had long been obsolescent in the great capitals; but at the very moment they disappeared, a network of organizational controls centering in the dominating capital city, ramifying by instant communication everywhere, came into existence and performed the same functions more effectively. Just to the extent that new powers were shadowy, impossible to pin down or come to grips with, etherialized, they were all the more effective. One might breach a city wall or kill a king: but how could one assault an international cartel?'' page 531 (bottom)  
% 19th century is a history of illness says Lavedan - page 532  
% concentrate organs of administration - ``Once the means of instantaneous communication were available, there was a fresh incentive to concentrate the organs of administration \ldots all these devices aided the rise of a vast commercial bureaucracy, capable of selling in ever-remoter territories by establishing the fashionable patterns of the metropolis as identical with civilization itself, or with anything that could remotely be called `real life.' '' page 534  
% ``The concentration of the rich is a typical metropolitan phenomenon. The princely ritual of conspicuous expenditure, no longer confined to the royal court, gives rise to the special luxury industries of the metropolis: dress, food, adornment, cosmetics. Because of the universal nature of the metropolitan standards, the exotic fashions of the rich are presently copied and reproduced on a mass scale for the benefit of the entire populace: that indeed is a necessary pillar of an expanding economy.''page 538  
% ``In short the monopoly power and knowledge that was first established in the citadel has come back, in a highly magnified form, in the final stage of metropolitan culture. In the end every aspect of life must be brought under control: controlled weather, controlled movement, controlled association, controlled production, controlled prices, controlled fantasy, controlled ideas. But th only purpose of control, apart from the profit, power, and prestige of the controllers, is to accelerate the process of mechanical control itself. The priests of this regime are easy to identify: the whole system, in its final stages, rests on the proliferation of secret, and thus controllable, knowledge; and the very division of labor that makes specialized scientific research possible also restricts the number of people capable of putting the fragments together. But where are the new gods? The nuclear reactor is the seat of their power: radio transmission and rocket flight their angelic means of communication and transportation: but beyond these minor agents of divinity the control room itself, with its Cybernetic Deity, giving His lightning-like decisions and His infallible answers: omniscience and omnipotence, triumphantly mated by science. Faces with this electronic monopoly of man's highest power, the human can come back only at the most primitive level. Sigmund Freud detected the beginnings of creative art in the infant's pride over his bowel movements. We can now detect its ultimate manifestation in paintings and sculpture whose contents betray a similar pride and a similar degree of autonomy---and a similar product.'' page 542  
% ``For unfortunately, once an economy is geared towards expansion, the means rapidly turn into an end, and "the going becomes the goal." Even more unfortunately, the industries that are favored by expansion must, to maintain their output, be devoted to goods that are readily consumable, either by their nature, or because they are so shoddily fabricated that the must soon be replaced. By fashion and built-in obsolescence the economies of machine production, instead of producing leisure and durable wealth, are duly cancelled out by mandatory consumption on an ever larger scale.'' - page 545  
% ``By the same token, the city itself becomes consumable, indeed expendable: the container must change as rapidly as its contents. This latter imperative undermines a main function of the city as an agent of human continuity. The living memory of the city, which once bound together generations and centuries, disappears: its inhabitants live in a self-annihilating moment-to-moment continuum. The poorest Stone Age savage never lived in such a destitute and demoralized community.'' - page 545 (top)  
% ``That life is an occasion for living, and not a pretext for supply items to newspapers, interviews on television, or a spectacle for crowds of otherwise vacant bystanders---these notions do not occur to the metropolitan mind. For them the show is the reality, and "the show must go on!" The metropolitan world, then, is a world where flesh and blood are less real than paper and ink and celluloid. It is a world where the great masses of people, unable to achieve a more full-bodied and satisfying means of living, take life vicariously, as readers, spectators, listeners, passive observers. Living thus, year in and year out, at second hand, remote from the nature that is outside them, and no less remove from the nature within, it is no wonder that they turn more and more of the functions of life, even thought itself, to the machines that their inventors have created. In this disordered environment only machines retain some of the attributes of life, while human beings are progressively reduced to a bundle of reflexes, without self-starting impulses or autonomous goals: 'behaviorist man.''' - page 547 (bottom)  
% ``Strangely the greatest justification for metropolitan congestion has passed almost unnoticed. Through the operation of these forced the big city, in the nineteenth century, served by way of size and variety of its population to foster functions that had never been sustained on anything like the same scale before: corporate associations and societies of like-minded persons, pursuing special interests that covered every aspect of human life. Up to this time, the church, the university, the school, the guild, had been the main foci of associated activities, apart from the city itself. But from the Renascence onwards, these new associations began to flourish and took a thousand different forms: scientific societies, museums, social clubs, insurance associations, political parties, economic groups, historic societies, fellowships of all kinds.'' - page 551 (now, with internet, what?)  
% [The Spruce Goose might have been an evolutionary dead end, but it was evolution nonetheless]  
% ``In its own right, the historic city retains, by reason of its amplitude and its long past, a larger a more various collection of cultural specimens than can be found elsewhere. Every variety of human function, ever experiment in human association, ever technological process, every mode of architecture and planning, can be found somewhere within its crowded area.'' Also a paragraph here about how cities pull in culture from wide distances around them and sort them.'' - page 562 (middle)  
% ``Though the great city is the best organ of memory man has yet created, it is also---until it becomes too cluttered and disorganized---the best agent for discrimination and comparative evaluation, not merely because it spreads out so many goods for choosing, but because it likewise creates minds of large range, capable of cooing with them.'' - Page 562 (bottom)  
% ``In the Museum of Mural in the Palais de Chaillot, a large number of admirable replicas of these paintings have been brought together. In a single afternoon one may see more paintings than one could take in comfortably in a fortnight of travelling. ... With color slides now available, the process could be carried even further: any small-town library or museum might borrow, and show in a projection room an even larger collection of murals.'' - Page 564 (top)  
% Nice description of the electric power grid --- a centralized power station, no matter how big, would only be able to reach so far. But our power system is made up of many small stations, each generating power in its own way, and serving its local area, but connected to the larger grid so other areas can pull in power from elsewhere on the network if needed. Then he compares that to the English library system. -  page 565 (middle)  
% ``Through its concentration of physical and cultural power, the city heightened the tempo of human intercourse and translate its products into forms that could be stored and reproduced. Through its monuments, written recored, and order habits of associate, the city enlarged the scope of all human activities, extending them backwards and forwards in time. By means of its storage facilities (buildings, vaults, archives, monuments, tablets, books), the city became capable of transmitting a complex cultures from generation to generation, for it marshalled together not only the physical means but the human agents needed to pass on and enlarge the heritage. That remains the greatest of the city's gifts. As compared with the complex human order of the city, our present ingenious electronic mechanisms for storing and transmitting information are crude and limited.'' -  page 569  
% ``Without the superposition of many different human activities, many levels of experience, within a limited urban area, where they are constantly on tap, too large a portion of life would be restricted to record-keeping. The wider the area of communication and the greater the number of participants, the more need there is for providing numerous accessible permanent centers for face-to-face intercourse and frequent meeting at every human level.'' - page 569 (bottom)  
% [it is possible, when we look back, that we will realize that it took _only_ 100 years for the worst fears of the luddites to come true]  
% ```under one roof' was the ideal expression of the paleotechnic planner in the nineteenth century. Steel and glass had a hypnotic effect upon the `progressive' nineteenth century minds, and still have on their successors. This ideal form derived from the hothouse.'' and ```All under one roof' may prove just a mock-up for the terminal form of the anti-city: `all in one underground shelter.' This would be environmental control with a vengeance.'' - Plate 38 [climate control = air-raid shelter]  
% The original Saltaire was named after Sir Titus Salt who built factory housing. - Plate 41  
% ``Stuyvesant Town, was built by a private insurance company with generous aid by the State: but its residential density of 393 per acre remains that of a slum. Despite its inner open spaced, this housing would require eighty additional acres to provide the part and playground space now regarded as desirable, nineteen more than the entire project without the buildings.'' - Plate 46  
% Mumford argues for garden cities because he still believes in the factory/worker relationship. He doesn't anticipate the power of urban _mixing_.  
% ``Witness the combination of shops, business and professional offices and municipal buildings show here, with an open plaza admirably designed---I speak as an eye witness--- for staging public ceremonies. No isolated shopping centers can compare in either convenience, efficiency, or human interest with the complex activities of a genuine civic center. The planning of cities cannot be confined to `housing, work, recreation, and circulation,' the standard planner's definition: the whole city must rather be conceived mainly as a theater for active citizenship, for education, and for a vivid and autonomous personal life.'' - Plate 61 (bottom)  
% Mumford puts forward a Chinese painting of the Festival of Spring as the ideal model of a city. - Plate 64  
  
  
@article{rozenblit2002misunderstood,  
  title={The misunderstood limits of folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth},  
  author={Rozenblit, Leonid and Keil, Frank},  
  journal={Cognitive Science},  
  volume={26},  
  number={5},  
  pages={521--562},  
  year={2002},  
  publisher={Elsevier},  
  url = {http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3062901/},  
  comment = {This was also referenced in the NPR article What You Really Know About Bicycles and it seems relevant to all sorts of stuff, up to and including CUP. },  
  category = {bicycles, illusion of explanatory depth, explaining}  
}  
% ``Indeed, even the theories used daily to guide scientific research are now considered to be incomplete, or at least less formally logical than classical views assumed them to be. Science-in-practice is often driven by hunches and vague impressions.''   
% ``The incompleteness of everyday theories should not surprise most scientists. We frequently discover that a theory that seems crystal clear and complete in our head suddenly develops gaping holes and inconsistencies when we try to set it down on paper.''   
% ``Laypeople rarely have to offer full explanations for most of the phenomena that they think they understand. Unlike many teachers, writers, and other professional “explainers,” laypeople rarely have cause to doubt their naïve intuitions. They believe that they can explain the world they live in fairly well.''   
% ``A second feature leading to the IOED may be a confusion of higher with lower levels of analysis. Most complex artificial and natural systems are hierarchical in terms of explanations of their natures. In explaining a car one might describe the function of a unit, such as the brakes, in general terms, and then turn to describing the functions of subcomponents, such as pistons and brake pads, which in turn can be broken down even further. The iterative nature of explanations of this sort may lead to an illusion of understanding when a person gains insight into a high level function and, with that rush of insight, falsely assumes an understanding of further levels down in the hierarchy of causal mechanisms. This effect can easily happen for many natural and artificial systems with complex causal structures, especially those that have “stable subassemblies.” The concept of stable subassemblies was developed by Simon (1996) as a way of describing units in the hierarchical structure of complex systems that are sufficiently internally stable that they can be conceived of as an operational unit.''   
% ``It may be that phenomena that are easy to visualize, and especially those that are easy to mentally animate, trigger an especially strong illusion of understanding and these may be more common in the domain of causal explanations.''   
% ``In short, if people have a drive for coherence and sense coherence when it emerges in a set of beliefs, they may confuse that sense of coherence with a more detailed understanding. Indeed, this may be a more accurate way of characterizing the levels-of-understanding confusion.''   
% ``Since it is impossible in most cases to fully grasp the causal chains that are responsible for, and exhaustively explain, the world around us, we have to learn to use much sparser representations of causal relations that are good enough to give us the necessary insights: insights that go beyond associative similarity but which at the same time are not overwhelming in terms of cognitive load. It may therefore be quite adaptive to have the illusion that we know more than we do so that we settle for what is enough. The illusion might be an essential governor on our drive to search for explanatory underpinnings; it terminates potentially inexhaustible searches for ever-deeper understanding by satiating the drive for more knowledge once some skeletal level of causal comprehension is reached.''  
  
@book{robert1988fatal,  
  title={The Fatal Shore},  
  author={Robert Hughes},  
  isbn={9780394753669},  
  lccn={87672252},  
  series={Vintage Series},  
  url={https://books.google.com/books?id=siN3wsyZaFEC},  
  year={1988},  
  publisher={Vintage Books}  
  comment = {The classic history/tome on the founding of Australia.},  
  category = {tomes, history, australia, criminals, founding}  
}  
% ``The unalterable fact of their tribal life was that women had no rights at all and could choose nothing. A girl was usually given away as soon as she was born. She was the absolute property of her kin until marriage, whereupon she became the equally helpless possession of her husband. The idea of a marriage based on romantic love was as culturally absurd to the Iora as it was to most Europeans. The purpose of betrothal was not, however, to amalgamate property, as in European custom, but to strengthen existing kinship bonds by means of reciprocal favors, It did not change a woman's status much. Both before and after, she was merely a root-grubbing, shell-gathering chattel, whose social assets were wiry arms, prehensile toes, and a vagina.''  
% ``As a mark of hospitality, wives were lent to visitors whom the Iora tribesmen wanted to honor. Warriors, before setting out on a revenge raid against some other aboriginal group, would swap their women as an expression of brotherhood. If a tribal group was about to be attacked and knew where its enemies were, it would sometimes send out a party of women in their direction; the attackers would then show that they were open to a peaceful solution by copulating with them. But if the women came back untouched, it was a signal that there was no choice by battle. A night's exchange of wives usually capped a truce between tribes. On these occasions most kinship laws except the most sacred incest taboos were suspended. Finally, at the great ceremonies or corroborrees, which involved hours of chant and ecstatic dancing and were meant to reinforce the tribe's identity by merging all individual egos into one communal mass, orgiastic sex played a part. However, since these affairs were rarely seen, sketchily described and never understood by the early colonists, it is impossible to say how large or how strictly prescribed a part it was. If a woman showed the least reluctance to be used for any of these purposes, if she seemed lazy or gave her lord and master any other cause for dissatisfaction, she would be furiously beaten or even speared.'' - Page 16  
% - So much for the argument that women's equality could be rooted in some kind of primativist framing. The BDSM community plays their little games of fantasy lifestyles that resemble this - but who would want to actually live in this world, if given the option?  
% ``We are tied to the Georgian past through artifacts that we would still like to use, given the chance. The town houses, squares, villas, gardens, paintings, silver and side tables seem to represent an "essence" of the eighteenth century, transcending "mere" politics. Since they present an uncommonly coherent image of elegance, common sense and clarity, we are apt to suppose that English society did too. Btu argument from design to society, like the syllogism that ascends from the particular to the general, usually goes awry.'' - Page 19  
% ``The Georgian London a modern visitor imagines was not their city. There were two such Londons, their separation symbolized by the cleavage that took place as the rich moved their residences westward from Covent Garden between 1700 and 1750, as the speculators ran up their noble squares and crescents---an absolute gulf between the new West End and the old, rotting East End of the city.'' - Page 10  
% ``London was judged the greatest city in the world, but also the worst smelling. Sewers still ran into open drains; the largest of these, until it was finally covered in 1765, was the Fleet Ditch. Armies of rats rose from the tenement cellars to go foraging in daylight.'' - Page 20  
% ``To speak of an eighteenth-century "working class" as though it were a homogeneous entity, united by class-consciousness and solidarity, is both anachronistic and abstract. It is a projection of the twentieth century onto the eighteenth. Loyalties ran between workers in the same trade, but rarely between workers as such.'' - Page 20-21  
% ``Doctors tended to side with their class allies, the factory-owners, and went on record again and again with their considered opinions that cotton lint, coal dust and phosphorus were harmless to the human lung, that fifteen hours at a machine in a room temperature of 85 degrees did not cause fatigue, that ten-year-olds could work a full night shift without risk of harm.'' - Page 22  
% Little mini-history of gin, page 23-24  
% ``In social matter, Georgian Englishmen far preferred generalization to reportage. ... A Spitalfields weaver, an Irish casual laborer and a Scottish ditch-digger might not even understand one another's speech, let alone share any aspirations; but seen from above they all belonged to the "mobbish class of persons."''  
% ``Like the Church, Law had its own diction and rituals and its own priests---bewigged men in scarlet and ermine.'' - Page 30  
% List of euphemisms for hanging - page 33  
% ``The common simile for the prison was a monastery or seminary, a closed order of people who studied vice, no holiness --- an appealing figure in its perfect inversion.'' - Page 38  
% ``In practice, high-security prisons are still human zoos. But the liberal view is that a jail is a sad but necessary expedient, harsh but susceptible of reform, which, if decently run, can keep a criminal out of social circulation without making him or her much worse. No such opinions were held two hundred years ago. Then it was clear that prisons, before they are institutions, are \emph{concentrations of criminals}: Their institutional definition began with the fact of criminality, not the hope of reform, and their essential nature was to degrade all their occupants by the relentless moral pressure of the group. The prison pickled the felon in evil, hardened him, perfused him with the hard salt of sin. Hence the loathing in which English jails were held by those who would never see the inside of one. They were the republics of a sublimated criminal class; they belonged to the antipodes of crime, not to the bright world of authority, which they represented only in a nominal way.'' - Page 39  
% A good description of the effort to figure out scurvy, how to calculate longitude, find the ``southern continent'' and observing Venus' transit of the sun. - Pages 49-50  
% Irish uprising on Norfolk Island - Page 116-117  
% ``To construct a sense of power from the meager social resources of the colony, the top dog had to be capricious - otherwise, the underdog's servility might be taken as a contract. Watling could neither dignify himself by rebelling, nor protect himself by truckling.'' - Page 104  
% Good description of the ``crossing the line'' (equator) ceremony - Page 154  
% ``We are used to thinking of the language of class as the language of the working class - as Gertrude Himmelfarb suggested. "because social history has generally been written by labor historians and socialists." But the language of class in the 1830s was mostly invented and used by a middle class trying to describe the social complications that surrounded it, and it did not resemble the scheme of a two-class society---proletariat versus bourgeoisie---that Engels would later invent.'' - Page 164  
% ``For the official English morality of the early nineteenth century was far more absolutist than ours. Today's orthodoxy is to look for the environmental excuse and seek the roots of crime in nurture, not nature---that is, outside the criminal's power of choice. One hundred and fifty years ago it was assumed that men and women \emph{chose} a life of crime.'' - Page 167  
% ``Such ideas, however, were in themselves a harshly coercive part of the social environment and may have caused many people to give up the struggle---to let go, to be what society said they would become, and accept the only milieu that would not rebuke them: crime.'' - Page 167  
% ``Many observers realized that crime does not appear in a social vacuum. From 1800 onward, a large literature---at first Evangelical in tone and rising at last to the power of Dickens's encyclopedic vision of the city as ultimate social and moral compressor---sought to describe the causes of crime: poverty, lack of work, dislocation, vile housing, addiction, the death of hope.'' - Page 167  
% ``The difference between the ``criminal classes'' of London and the \emph{classes dangereuses} of Paris was that the English were not as dangerous; events like the Gordon Riots in London were the exception, not the rule. England had not tradition of riot and revolt abetted by outpourings of aggression from the criminal classes, whereas the French were used to such explosions from the ``vile mob,'' as the French minister Adolphe Thiers called it in 1850, that had brought ``every Republic down in ruin.'''' - Page 168  
% Overview of the history of Irish rebellion and class unity - Page 181-182  
% The story of the escape and turn to cannibalism of prisoners from Macquarie Harbor. - Pages 219-226  
% Bushranger gangs of Thomas Davey and Michael Howe who eluded the authorities and fought bush battles and became the stuff of legend. Pages 226-234  
% The women on Norfolk island were prisoners of prisoners, sold ``in an old store where the women has to strip naked and `race around the room' while Potter kept up a running commentary on their `respective values'.'' Page 260  
% The regular social pleasure was the Thursday evening dance in the soldier's barracks where, ``all the women would join in the dance of the mermaids, each one being naked with numbers painted on their backs so as to be recognized by their admirers who would clap their hands on seeing their favorite perform some grotesque action...with the assitance of a gallon or two of Rum. Such amusements were the talk of the soldiers for days before and after the performance.'' Page 260  
% Homosexuality and sheep fucking in the bush, Page 267  
% Contemporary realization that ``sexual contact in prison tents to be metabolized into relationships of power.'' Sadistic humiliation, the strong breaking down the weak. Page 269  
% The Irish and English working people called homosexuality ``the crime whose name cannot be uttered'' which was softened by Oscar Wilde to ``the Love that dare not speak its name''. Page 264  
% ``When one of the Jacobins pointed out that Christ himself had been a reformer, Braxfield chuckled and snorted: "Muckle he made o' that---\emph{He} was hanget."'' Page 176  
% ``Everywhere else in the historical experience of the British Empire, colonies had been planted where the "natives" and "Indians" understood and defended the idea of property.'' Including Virginia, Africa, New Zealand, and the East Indies. "These proofs of prior ownership might be violated by the whites (and often were); but they could not be denied or ignored.'' ``The Aborigines were hunter-gatherers who roamed over the land without marking out boundaries or making fixed settlements. They had no idea of farming or stock-raising. They saved nothing, lived entirely in the present, and were, in the whited' eyes, so ignorant of property as to be little more than intelligent animals "who only superiority above the brute consists in their use of the spear, their extreme ferocity, and their employing fire in the cookery of their food.'' Page 273  
% ``the Aborigines seem to have despised the convicts, whom they saw laboring under conditions which their own pride would never have accepted, treated like the defeated members of some enemy tribe.'' ``"No good-all same like croppy," some tribesmen said when offered some left-over convict slops, "croppy" being the disdainful term for an Irish convict'' ``our natives commonly attach some idea of inferiority to what is Irish and Ireland.'' - Page 279  
% Legend had it that Charles Dickens based the character Fagin on Ikey Solomon, who escaped on the trip to Newgate Prison in London, and made his way to Australia, where they couldn't touch him because there was no warrant for his arrest there. Eventually the warrant from England did arrive, and Ikey offered his services to the government of Australia as a detector of forged money to try to keep from being deported. But that didn't work. Page 390-391.  
% ``When Australians see the ruin of an old building, our impulse is either to finish tearing it down or to bring in the architects and restore it as a cultural center, if large, or a restaurant, if small. Port Arthur is the only major example of an Australian historical ruin appreciate and kept for its own sake (although local entrepreneurs have tried, and so far failed, to refurbish it as Convictland).'' Page 399 onto 400  
% ``How had he achieved such quiescence with such minimal means? He saw to it that convicts were never insulted or sworn at, and that he rarely had them flogged because the lash "often exacerbates them and drives them to crime instead of reforming them"; he preferred solitary confinement, which, "much dreaded...subdues them through boredom.'' Page 403  
% ``The knout was made of the hardest whipcord, of an unusual size. The cord was put into salt water till it was saturated; it was then put into the sun to dry; by this process it became like wire, the eighty-one knots cutting the flesh as if a saw had been used'' - page 404  
% ``This wasp-waisted isthmus between the surf of Pirate's Bay and calm of Norfolk Bay, less than 100 yards wide, was the key to Port Arthur; it was and still is the only way a man can leave the Tasman Peninsula by land. Getting across it, therefore, became an obsessive focus of convict ingenuity. They walked, crept, ran, waded and even hopped. One prisoner, a former actor named William Hunt, "who in his younger days had belonged to a company of strolling mountebanks," disguised himself as an enormous "boomer" or male kangaroo. He nearly got across to Forestier's Peninsula before two picket-guards, thinking he really was a kangaroo, spotted him and gave choice , levelling their muskets. "Don't shoot, I am only Billy Hunt," The nervous marsupial squeaked to their consternation'' - Page 406  
% Pages 414 - 424: The story of the last aboriginals on Tasmania. Eventually every white man in Tasmania formed a line across the whole peninsula with a thousand muskets and 30,000 rounds of ammunition and in seven days swept the whole land, but they only managed to catch two aborigines. Then it tells the story of Trucanini who helped a white dude named Robinson to round up all the last of the Aborigines in Tasmania and resettle them on Flinders Island, and tried to Europeanize them. The last man died in 1869. Trucanini was the last living Aborigine on Tasmania. She died in 1878.  
% There's an amazing plate on race relations from 1828. It's pictographic and shows Arthur's policy of equal justice to blacks and whites alike, for Aborigines to read.  
% ``The treadmill was like a waterwheel, but it was forty feet long, with wooden treads nine inches wide. As many as fifty convicts could be punished on it at once. The convict's name for it were expressive: the everlasting staircase, or because the stiff prison clothes scraped one's groin after a few hours on it, the cockchafer.'' Page 454  
% Descriptions of torture devices, the tube-gag, the spread-eagle, and the scavenger's daughter. The tube-gag was an adaptation of an ancient English instrument of torture for women, the "scolds' bridle". Page 535-536  
``Gold disturbed the order of Anglo-Australian society - from pastoral "aristocrat" down to convict-with shudders of democracy. Gold wealth was not "democratic," but it did expand the existing oligarchy. It would diversify both Australian markets and Australian production and help create Australian bourgeoisie. The clay-stained digger, a butcher in his former life, who still carried the grease-stink of tallow in his hair and argot of the diggings on his tongue, would soon have his Axminster-carpeted drawing room in Toorak. The cash his gold set in circulation would construct suburbia. His spending habits would raise more merchants to comfort. Fortunes were made by diggers-and extracted from them. Gold did respect class. It slightly favored the low: A horny-handed navvy miner or seaman with muscles hardened by years of manual work could sing a shaft twenty feet to the blue auriferous strata of Bendingo in the time that it took a refined "new chum" his hands pulpy and blistered, to scratch away three feet of earth.'' ``"We be the aristocracy now," miners were heard to say as they rollicked in the Melbourne grog-shops, "and the aristocracy now be we.'' Page 564 onto 565  
% Unrelated to this book, except for Tasmania, I heard on the BBC that the Tasmanian Tiger went extinct when farmers hunted them because they thought the Tasmanian tiger was stealing their sheet. Turned out it was competiting neighbor farmers. http://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-42318444  
  
  
  
  
  
@book{applebaum2003gulag,  
  title={Gulag: A history},  
  author={Applebaum, Anne},  
  year={2003},  
  publisher={Doubleday Books}  
  comment={An in-depth look at the effects of the GULAG on the prisoners in it.},  
}  
% See photo: ``By changing nature, man changes himself'' of a woman with a jackhammer working on the White Sea Canal   
% This book is 600 pages of listings of the minutia of daily life of the GULAG prisoners. Written in the modern academic style it is edited for content not at all, and not written in a way that tells any kind of story.  
% It does HINT at what could be an amazing book: documenting the effort at total top-down control of an economy, making heavy use of this mechanism of the GULAG. How at the top they continually kept trying to tweak the GULAG to work better, and instead managed to make it worse at the bottom, with the expected declining output overall.  
% ``Another form of torture specific to the islands, mentioned in both archives and memoirs, was to be sent ``to the mosquitoes.'' Kinger, a White Army officer who later made one of the few successful escapes from Solovetsky, wrote that he once saw this torture inflicted on a prisoner who complained because a parcel sent to him from home had been requisitioned. Angry prison guards responded by removing all his clothes, including his underwear, and tying him to a post in the forest, which was, in the northern summer, swarming with mosquitoes. ``Within half an hour, his whole unlucky body was covered with swelling bites,'' wrote Klinger. Eventually, the man fainted from the pain and loss of blood.'' - Page 24  
% ``Mussolini once said of Lenin that he ``is an artist who has worked in men as others have worked in marble or metal.'' This description may be better applied to Stalin, who literally enjoyed the sight of large numbers of human bodies, marching or dancing in perfect synchronization. He was captivated by ballet, by orchestrated exhibitions of gymnastics, and by parades featuring giant pyramids built out of anonymous, contorted human figures. Like Hitler, Stalin was also obsessed with cinema, particularly Hollywood musicals, with their enormous casts of coordinated singers and dancers. He might have derived a different but related form of pleasure from the vast teams of prisoners who dug canals and build railway lines at his bidding.'' - Page 53  
% Chapter 4, on the White Sea Canal, is pretty good. But the White Sea Canal, dug by hand with primitive tools at great cost in both money and human life was again replaced by the railroad, just like the Erie Canal and other US canals. Canals were a technological fad of the 19th into 20th centuries. People with more foresight may have seen their inevitable demise.  
% On pages 213-215 there is a lovely description of how the awful black bread became sacred, and the rituals that arose around it. There's a nice description of how if you are starving you need to eat your food slowly, but all at once in about half an hour. It isn't good to stretch it out over the course of the day.   
% Since crossing the tundra or the taiga means days of traveling with little or no food, some prisoners would plan their escape with a extra person, preferably a fat person, who they would call ``the meat'' or ``the walking supply.'' The meat of course would be killed and eaten when food supplies ran low. - Page 398  
% Description of, and doubts about the book The Long Walk - it may just be a retelling of Rudyard Kipling's short story The Man Who Was. (Which makes sense in the context of other parts of this chapter which talks about how people who could tell a really good story could use that as a way to get extra food and supplies from other prisoners. Story telling was an extremely valued commodity. Maybe The Long Walk is a prison-story-told version of The Man Who Was?) Page 399  
% The story of how Beria almost immediately after the death of Stalin started the first wave of amnesty for prisoners. Perhaps because nobody knew better than he how abusive and uneconmical the prison system was. Page 480  
  
  
@book{barry2007rising,  
  title={Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How It Changed America},  
  author={Barry, J.M.},  
  isbn={9781416563327},  
  url={https://books.google.com/books?id=Lf2VCLhvAk4C},  
  year={2007},  
  publisher={Simon \& Schuster},  
  comment={An in-depth Power-Broker style history book about the engineering of the Mississippi and the flood of 1927. Covers the lead-up to the flood, and the power manipulations that went on during the flood that led to the dynamiting of the levees below New Oreleans, ostensibly to relieve pressure on the levees that protected New Orleans.},  
  Category={Criticality, Transportation, Economics, flooding, mississippi, engineering, new orleans, nola}  
}  
% The men in power made moves to dynamite the levees even though the preponderance of scientific evidence suggested the levees would be fine due to other levees failing further up the river.  
% The book suggests they did this to protect their investments in NOLA (most of the men involved were bankers.)  
% The idea was that even if the levees held, people were panicking and leaving the city, and thus impacting their investments.  
% I think it's equally likely that these men of power felt like they COULD take action, and so they did. And they knew other people EXPECTED them to take action, and so they did.  
% It makes me wonder about willful people: are they likely to push through bad ideas, to take action where NOT taking action is the right move, just because they CAN take action? Should these people really be our leaders?  
% One theme that recurs throughout this book is that _labor_ was understood at the time as a critical resource to industry. In the early part of the century, while labor was recognized as being _people_, it was ALSO talked about at a higher level as just a cold resource, in a way that would never be tolerated today. (Even if the old way is actually more accurate.)  
% Labor, like soylent green, is people. Then, the needs for labor outweighed the fact that labor is people. This was well understood in the south. Without slavery, how do you keep labor in the remote parts of the country where it was needed for planting?  
% The easiest way was to treat people well. But as soon as the flood arrived, there was nothing left to treat them well with. And so they FORCED the labor to stay. By not evacuating them. By holding them in camps.  
% Labor was treated as people only as long as it benefited capitalism. As soon as treating them as people wasn't feasible, the necessary resource was retained in alternative ways.  
  
  
  
  
  
